Why TestCafe? + How It Works 2.0 (#5693)
DevExpress/testcafe: docs/articles/documentation/why-testcafe/README.md

---
layout: docs
title: Why TestCafe?
permalink: /documentation/why-testcafe/
---

# Why TestCafe?

TestCafe excels where other end-to-end testing solutions fall short.

## One NPM package

TestCafe doesn't require the use of extra tools and frameworks. All you need to get up and running is a recent version of Node.js, a browser — any browser, and the TestCafe NPM package.

## As simple and extendable as JavaScript itself

> TestCafe tests are full-fledged Node.js apps. They are compatible with your favourite JavaScript libraries and preprocessors.

Reviewer: "TestCafe tests are full-fledged Node.js apps... " - Once again I think that it makes TestCafe look more complicated than it really is. Should I create Node.js apps from scratch? Let's make sure that people understand that tests are simple... and internally they may be Node.js apps, but users get the simplicity of tests, yet the capability to use a language / syntax you already know. 

"Compatible with your favorite libraries..." I guess this sentence undermines your previous statement that TestCafe needs to extra frameworks or tools. Here you are talking about extra libraries and preprocessors. 

So if you want to have a message about simplicity, let's define it clearly - what are the boundaries. What can you do with a simple setup and simple things. Extensibility, additional libraries and preprocessors - does that fit into the "simple" narrative? I don't think so. There should be a boundary somewhere between "simple" and "powerful/extendable" and we need to make sure we define it and that the text follows it. 

Here are some thoughts - rough ideas: 

Minimal API, Familiar Syntax
9 out of 10 cases are simple - all you need to to learn TestCafe API... That's less than 20 members that correspond to user action or a few assertions. And the great part is that you write it in JavaScript, which you already know. If you need to access any element, do it as you usually do it. 

Your Website uses Custom Libraries and Preprocessors? Your Tests Can Too!
You're not using vanilla JavaScript on your website? You'd rather have your test utilize the same libraries and pre-processors that you already incorporated into your workflow? Not a problem. TestCafe scripts are Node.js apps internally, so anything that works on your website will work in tests.

## Complex tests made easy

> TestCafe’s intuitive and powerful toolkit makes testing easy, whether you’re working with a landing page or a complex web app.

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't really say "why"... The words "powerful and intuitive" need explanation, a backup.  It's better to always back up your claims. You may not fully describe how something works, but at least mention the thing that makes something powerful or easy. 

Here's an attempt to inject a reason (I don't know that this reason is correct though :-) )

TestCafe API doesn't limit your interactions with the page - you can always do more with JavaScript. That's why you can test any page - from static landing pages, to entry forms, to complex web apps.

Reviewer 2: I guess these are introductory phrases, proofs follow within this section. If I were to insert a reason right here, I'd say:

TestCafe is ready for advanced scenarios with iframes, multiple windows, security-sensitive features, etc. That's why you can test any page - from static landing pages, to entry forms, to complex web apps.

> ### Mock Requests

Reviewer: Does this continue the "simple" message? (Probably not). It's more likely part of the "Powerful and Extendable" message. So again - there should be some separation between the two.

Reviewer 2: This section is about complex things made easy, mocking is one of these things. Does it seem more appropriate to you if we emphasize ease-of-use here as well?

---
layout: docs
title: Why TestCafe?
permalink: /documentation/why-testcafe/
---

# Why TestCafe?

TestCafe excels where other end-to-end testing solutions fall short.

> ## Comprehensive and easy to set up

Author: Except it's not really self-sufficient as it relies on browsers and Node.js! :D 
Also, 'easy to install' does not convey what we want to say - *everything* is easy to install. The hard part is getting it to work after the installation is over.

> ## Comprehensive and easy to set up

Author: I think I found an option that can satisfy us all:

```suggestion
## Feature-complete out of the box
```

> ## Comprehensive and easy to set up

Reviewer: Those are two overused marketing words that we put together - "feature-complete" and "out-of-the-box". And we put them together here. We're not really talking about product being feature complete here. We're saying it only requires Node.js and a browser - which everyone has - to work. No/minimal dependencies. That's what I was trying to say by "self-sufficient". I mean sure, everything requires some platform/framework/os to run - nothing is purely self-sufficient... So maybe we should be specific to what we're saying in this section: 

```suggestion
## No 3rd-Party Dependencies
```

or 

```suggestion
## All TestCafe Needs Is Node.js and a Browser
```

TestCafe does not depend on Selenium or other testing software. TestCafe runs on the popular Node.js platform, and makes use of the browsers that you already have. For many users, the installation process consists of a single step:

```js
npm install -g testcafe
```

## Human-readable JavaScript tests

> TestCafe is a JavaScript framework. But you don’t need to be a JavaScript guru to write TestCafe tests. The core components of our API are intuitive and only require a basic knowledge of the language.

Author: > Sentences should rarely if ever start with conjunctions.
Except when it's necessary to evoke a specific emotional response, which, I would argue, is the case here.

Moreover, TestCafe doesn't have a simple API. *Some parts* of our API are simple to *use*.

> TestCafe is a JavaScript framework. But you don’t need to be a JavaScript guru to write TestCafe tests. The core components of our API are intuitive and only require a basic knowledge of the language.

Author: I'd also advise against pushing TestCafe Studio to our open-source customers (the primary audience of this article) in such an aggressive manner.

P.S.
a) TestCafe Studio is *not* an IDE. It can't be a development environment if there's no programming involved.
b) We should probably altogether refrain from using the IDE metaphor because IDEs don't have the best reputation. I'd wager most people associate IDEs with outdated, bloated applications like Eclipse.
c) One could argue that TestCafe Studio is not as complete as it could be :)

> TestCafe is a JavaScript framework. But you don’t need to be a JavaScript guru to write TestCafe tests. The core components of our API are intuitive and only require a basic knowledge of the language.

Author: Would this work?

```suggestion
The core components of our Node.js API are intuitive and only require a basic knowledge of JavaScript.
```

> TestCafe is a JavaScript framework. But you don’t need to be a JavaScript guru to write TestCafe tests. The core components of our API are intuitive and only require a basic knowledge of the language.

Reviewer: Looks good to me. Thanks

## A first class citizen of the Node.js ecosystem

> If you want to take your testing experience to the next level, you can always integrate additional JavaScript libraries and preprocessors into TestCafe tests.

Author: The point of third-party library integration is being able to do extra stuff within your tests. AFAIK third-party libraries can't even access the TestCafe automation engine.

> If you want to take your testing experience to the next level, you can always integrate additional JavaScript libraries and preprocessors into TestCafe tests.

Author: What about
```suggestion
Like all Node.js scripts, TestCafe tests can leverage the capabilities of third-party JavaScript libraries and preprocessors.
```

> If you want to take your testing experience to the next level, you can always integrate additional JavaScript libraries and preprocessors into TestCafe tests.

Reviewer: Sounds good, thanks

> ## Powerful but simple

Author: This is a promotional article so baseless claims are par for the course. When we talk about stability, we do not provide any benchmarks - why should this be any different?

There's no point in advertising our advanced features without mentioning the ease of use. Selenium users can already do most of the stuff we mention.

> ## Powerful but simple

Author: Should I add a segment that explores these features' accessibility?

> ## Powerful but simple

Reviewer: It should be one of two ways. Either you don't call it "simple", or you call it "simple" and then mention something about simplicity in the content.

> ## Powerful but simple

Author: Ok this actually makes sense. Besides, we mention the simplicity two paragraphs earlier. I'm going to go with your suggestion.

> The advanced features of the TestCafe API can help you test complex, security-sensitive web applications.

Author: If this statement were true, our support for third-party libraries would not be a selling point :)

> The advanced features of the TestCafe API can help you test complex, security-sensitive web applications.

Author: ```suggestion
The advanced features of the TestCafe API help you test complex, security-sensitive web applications.
```

> The advanced features of the TestCafe API can help you test complex, security-sensitive web applications.

Reviewer: I don't like the phrase "The advanced features of the TestCafe API". I'm not even sure that an API can have a "feature". I think products have features. API is the programming interface - it's just methods you call and properties you change. 

Maybe we can start from scratch here? What are the features we're talking about specifically? What are "complex" applications?

> The advanced features of the TestCafe API can help you test complex, security-sensitive web applications.

Author: The sentence describes the following features, each with a small sub-section of its own: 

- Mock requests
- Client-side injections
- Frames and windows
- Concurrent Tests

Would this: 
```suggestion
The advanced features of TestCafe help you test complex, security-sensitive web applications.
```

### Mock Requests

Emulate HTTP responses to feed your app sample data, troubleshoot connectivity errors and cheat downtime.

### Client-side injections

Execute custom client-side code to parse the web page, examine its state, or even add extra dependencies.

### Frames and windows

Make use of multiple browser windows to test out complex user interactions. Switch to and from iframes with ease and stability.

### Concurrent tests

Run your tests in multiple browsers at once to quickly uncover browser-specific errors.

> ## Automate what’s possible

Author: I see where you're coming from but isn't that the point? Some things *are* impossible to automate! The `built-in automation` promise is too vague, and doesn't reflect the value that TestCafe provides. Let me think of something better...

> ## Automate what’s possible

Author: Would this be better?
```suggestion
## Made with automation in mind
```

> ## Automate what’s possible

Reviewer: I'm not sure I like it better than my version... :-) But it's okay.

### Automated waiting

Manual timeouts are a thing of the past. Asynchronous from the ground up, TestCafe knows when to wait and what to wait for before a test can continue.

### Automated authentication scripts

Save and activate user roles to easily switch between different user accounts.

### Hooks

Keep your code clean with hooks — routines that are repeated before and after each test.

> ## Helps you help yourself

Reviewer: This sounds weird to me - a bit childish, I guess... Not something you would here everyday. 

If we want to do something generic, then we can say this: 

```suggestion
## And so much more
```

or maybe

```suggestion
## Superior User Experience
```

> ## Interactive when you need it

Author: Good point. 
Would this:
```suggestion
## Hands-on when you need it
```
be any better? 'Hands-on' implies that the user can take part in the processes that are usually automatic.

> ## Interactive when you need it

Reviewer: I don't think it's a good fit. Not sure, but in my experience "hands-on" is used to emphasize that other than watching someone else do something, you do it / learn it yourself. You can learn to play the guitar by watching YouTube videos, or you can have a "hands-on" experience, where you actually get to play and someone will watch you and correct your mistakes. 

But I'm not sure what to use here. I don't really see a word that unites all these features.

### TestCafe Studio

Use a GUI test recorder that makes the power of TestCafe accessible to people with zero programming experience.

> ### Live mode

Author: AFAIK 'Live mode' is literally what this feature is [called](https://devexpress.github.io/testcafe/documentation/guides/basic-guides/run-tests.html#live-mode). @VasilyStrelyaev am I right?

> ### Live mode

Author: ```suggestion
### Live test reloading
```

> ### Live mode

Reviewer: So what's is being reloaded? The test, or test results?

> ### Live mode

Author: AFAIK, when you enable 'live mode', TestCafe restarts the test every time the test file is modified.

> Instantly see how the changes you introduce impact the test.

Author: ```suggestion
Enable the Live Mode to instantly see how the changes you introduce impact the test.
```

Reviewer: Again, now that I'm re-reading this, I don't understand what is being changed and what is being impacted. I change the page? Or I change the script? What reloads then?

Author: See https://github.com/DevExpress/testcafe/pull/5693/files#r532975785

> Enable the built-in [Live Mode](https://devexpress.github.io/testcafe/documentation/guides/basic-guides/run-tests.html#live-mode) to reload your test every time you make changes to the test file.

Reviewer: I don't think 'reload' is the right word. Makes me think that I change the test file, then that file is reloaded... Should we probably say "re-run", or "restart". 

```suggestion
Enable the built-in [Live Mode](https://devexpress.github.io/testcafe/documentation/guides/basic-guides/run-tests.html#live-mode) to restart your test every time you make changes to the test file.
```

> ### Debug mode

Author: Again, a built-in debugging mode signifies something completely different from the abstract ability to somehow debug your tests

> ### Debug mode

Author: ```suggestion
### Debugging assistance
```

> ### Debug mode

Reviewer: OK

Pause your tests to examine the app and troubleshoot errors.

## Community-driven

### Free and Open Source

TestCafe is distributed for free under the MIT license.

### Actively maintained

The TestCafe team is quick to respond to GitHub issues and StackOverflow questions. Community suggestions shape the future of the product.

### In-house support

All TestCafe Studio Pro customers (subscribers and trial users alike) receive prompt, proactive support directly from the package maintainers.

> ## How Does TestCafe Work?

Reviewer: On this level, we listed features - or statements like "community-driven". Now we come to a question, which sounds a bit odd to me. How about we also turn it into a statement: 

```suggestion
## Unrivaled product architecture 
```

The above, of course, assumes that no other product is quite like ours. If that's not true, then maybe something a bit more vague: 

```suggestion
## Flexibility powered by internal architecture
```

Author: Would this work?
```suggestion
## A solution like no other
```
It's vague enough for it to be undeniably true, and also does a good job representing the contents of the section

Reviewer: I would still like to be a bit more specific. Maybe "An architecture like no other" or "A test engine like no other". The word "Solution" refers to everything - but this part specifically addresses our internal architecture choices. It's weird to list a few differences and then have a title that says "a solution like no other". It implies that everything before it was the same as everywhere else :-)

Reviewer: Any capitalization style would work - @AlexSkorkin tells me you guys have a system there.

> The automation engine behind TestCafe takes over browsers and the web pages they display to simulate user activity.

Author: We're describing a general rule - there's no need for the definite article.

> The automation engine behind TestCafe takes over browsers and the web pages they display to simulate user activity.

Author: ```suggestion
To simulate user activity, the automation engine behind TestCafe takes over browsers and the web pages they display.
```

> The automation engine behind TestCafe takes over browsers and the web pages they display to simulate user activity.

Reviewer: Maybe :-)

> ### The Server-Client Architecture

Author: In our particular case, the 'server' part should probably come first to emphasize the primacy of the server-side components

> ### The Server-Client Architecture

Author: I mean, it's easy enough to change... I'd just really like to hear a second (well, third) opinion on this matter.

> The server-client architecture of TestCafe allows it to execute system-level and in-browser code.

Author: That's too vague. Besides, the sentence could be perceived to imply that the code `handled` by TestCafe comes from *outside* TestCafe, which is not at all what we want to say.

> The server-client architecture of TestCafe allows it to execute system-level and in-browser code.

Author: Ok, but let me rephrase this. At the very least, `architecture` cannot handle anything :)

> The server-client architecture of TestCafe allows it to execute system-level and in-browser code.

Author: ```suggestion
TestCafe's hybrid client-server architecture lets it execute both system-level and in-browser code.
```

> * TestCafe uses [high-level system APIs](https://github.com/DevExpress/testcafe-browser-tools) to launch and manage browsers. This is necessary to achieve full control over test execution.

Author: Good point. Let me think.

> * TestCafe uses [high-level system APIs](https://github.com/DevExpress/testcafe-browser-tools) to launch and manage browsers. This is necessary to achieve full control over test execution.

Author: ```suggestion
* TestCafe uses [high-level system APIs](https://github.com/DevExpress/testcafe-browser-tools) to launch and manage browsers. This is necessary to control the test execution.
```

* TestCafe tests are Node.js scripts. They can launch services and applications, read and write system files, make use of your favorite libraries.
* TestCafe uses client-side automation scripts to execute in-browser actions. This is how our testing library handles asynchronous events, simulates user activity, and executes user-defined JavaScript.

> Early versions of TestCafe ran entirely in the browser. Moving to a hybrid architecture allowed us to improve the tests' stability and expand the framework's range of testing capabilities. 

Reviewer: It just looks a bit wordy - same thing can be expressed with fewer words: 

```suggestion
Early versions of TestCafe ran entirely in the browser. A hybrid architecture allowed us to improve test stability and extend the framework's testing capabilities. 
```

> ### Page Proxying: Bridging the Client-Server Gap

Reviewer: I get that people use the phrase "bridging the gap" a lot... But I guess that "gap" is something that's missing - it's an issue we're fixing (bridging). In this case you seem to call the Client-Server architecture "a gap", but that's something we decided to do. So it seems like we're simply solving the problems we created ourselves. In other words, I wouldn't use that phrase in this context. 

Maybe we simply this to the first part only?

```suggestion
### Page Proxying
```

> Our experience shows that this hybrid approach gives users the best of both worlds. Early versions of TestCafe ran entirely in the browser. This caused a number of issues. The tests’ capabilities were limited, the application often interfered with page execution, and the sub-optimal logic separation caused browser crashes. Since then, we decoupled the engine, exposed the underlying Node.js API, and implemented a test runner that executes test scripts server-side.

Reviewer: I hope this still makes sense :-) 

```suggestion
Our experience shows that this hybrid approach results in the most stable test execution process. Early versions of TestCafe ran entirely in the browser. Compared to the client-server model, testing capabilities were limited, the application could have interfered with page code, and logic separation design caused accidental browser crashes. To eliminate these shortcomings, we decoupled the engine, exposed the underlying Node.js API, and implemented a test runner that executes test scripts on the server-side.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Early versions of TestCafe ran entirely in the browser. Moving to a hybrid architecture allowed us to improve the tests' stability and expand the framework's range of testing capabilities. 
```

> ### Page Proxying: Bridging the Server-Client Gap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Page Proxying: Bridging the Client-Server Gap
```

You may notice that when you run TestCafe, the URL in the browser’s address bar does not match that of your website. This happens because TestCafe runs an under-the-hood reverse proxy.

> The [testcafe-hammerhead](https://github.com/DevExpress/testcafe-hammerhead) proxy intercepts browser requests and adds automation scripts to the requested resources. It then modifies the URLs contained within the resource, so that they point to the proxy. This way, neither the client-side code, nor the resources it communicates with, can tell that the page has been modified. To conceal automation scripts from the rest of the page code, TestCafe mocks the browser API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [testcafe-hammerhead](https://github.com/DevExpress/testcafe-hammerhead) proxy intercepts browser requests and adds automation scripts to the requested resources. It then modifies the URLs contained within the resource, so that they point to the proxy. This means that neither the client-side code nor the linked resources can tell that the page has been modified. To conceal automation scripts from the rest of the page code, TestCafe mocks browser API.
```

Author: Sorry I was 99% sure I left a comment on this particular edit... Just two questions left 😄 
* The word `linked` doesn't adequately describe the relationship between the code and the resources that it communicates with... 
* Surely, the plural of API is APIs... am I missing something here?

Would this work:

```suggestion
The [testcafe-hammerhead](https://github.com/DevExpress/testcafe-hammerhead) proxy intercepts browser requests and injects automation scripts into the requested pages. When the proxy receives data, it changes all the URLs on the resource so that they point to the proxy. This means that neither the client-side code nor other resources in use can tell that the page has been modified. To conceal automation scripts from the rest of the page code, TestCafe also intercepts some of the requests to the browser API.
```

> The proxying mechanism ensures that the page appears to be hosted at the original URL even to the test code. This is why you can use your website’s actual URL in tests, and pay no mind to the browser’s address bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proxying mechanism ensures that the page appears to be hosted at the original URL even to the test code. This is why you can use your website’s actual URL in tests, and pay no attention to the browser’s address bar.
```

Author: Tbh I'd simply remove the second sentence. It's redundant.
```suggestion
The proxying mechanism ensures that the page appears to be hosted at the original URL even to the test code.
```

Reviewer: ok

### Browser Sandboxing

At the end of each run, TestCafe deletes all browser cookies, empties the storage, and reloads the page, thereby preventing undesirable interference with subsequent tests. You don’t need to write boilerplate code to reset the app state and reverse the changes your tests make.

Tests that run in parallel operate in independent sandboxed environments. This helps prevent server-side collisions.

### Client-Side Scripts

> To perform common testing tasks, TestCafe translates server-side calls to its API into client-side code. However, some scenarios require the execution of client-side code that TestCafe cannot automatically generate. That’s why the framework offers multiple ways to execute user-defined JavaScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To perform basic testing tasks, TestCafe translates server-side API calls into client-side code. Some complex scenarios, however, require the execution user-defined JavaScript code. You can embed such code in a number of ways:
```

Author: a) Client functions aren't an *advanced* feature per se, and is appealing for users of all skill levels. Your test scenarios don't have to be that complex for you to try it in action.
b) We're describing several different kinds of code injections, none of which are represented particularly well by the word `embed` :(

Reviewer: We can remove the word complex and change the last part: 

```suggestion
To perform basic testing tasks, TestCafe translates server-side API calls into client-side code. Some scenarios, however, require the execution user-defined JavaScript code. TestCafe allows you to run/inject such scripts in a number of ways:
```

Author: The first sentence describes the TestCafe API in its entirety - so it would be incorrect to label the tasks in question 'basic'. 
```suggestion
TestCafe translates server-side test code into client-side JavaScript, and injects it into the browsers that it controls. This process enables the framework to perform common in-browser actions. Some testing scenarios, however, require the execution of custom client-side code. There are three ways to do it with TestCafe:
```

[Client Scripts](/../guides/advanced-guides/inject-client-scripts.md) inject custom JavaScript files, such as temporary extra dependencies, into the page.
[Client Functions](../guides/basic-guides/obtain-client-side-info.md) evaluate user-defined JavaScript expressions and pass their return value to the server side. They are useful when you want to examine the page or access its URL.
The [Selector](../guides/basic-guides/select-page-elements.md) function can launch user-defined client-side code to find a DOM element that cannot be otherwise identified.

> > The TestCafe documentation describes the limitations of user-defined client-side scripts.

Reviewer: It's a bit weird to end the article like that... We talk about limitations - being negative. 

Maybe we should add a section that refers people to getting started resources? The message in the end should be something like "ok, you like what you just read? Then let's go!" :-)

> [Client Functions](../guides/basic-guides/obtain-client-side-info.md) evaluate user-defined JavaScript expressions and pass their return value to the server side. They are useful when you want to examine the page or access the website’s URL.

Reviewer: The last part sounds a bit weird to me. I guess it's a reference to some complicated scenario, but wouldn't I already know the website's URL that I'm testing? :-) 

```suggestion
[Client Functions](../guides/basic-guides/obtain-client-side-info.md) evaluate user-defined JavaScript expressions and pass their return value to the server side. These are useful when you want to examine the page or access the website’s URL.
```

Author: Not necessarily! Web applications often generate seemingly random URLs out of technological necessity. case in point: youtube links.

Reviewer: I guess to me, "website URL" means only the top-level part - i.e. YouTube.com, not the path to a specific page.

 ```suggestion
[Client Functions](../guides/basic-guides/obtain-client-side-info.md) evaluate user-defined JavaScript expressions and pass their return value to the server side. They are useful when you want to examine the page or access its URL.
```

> However, client-side injections have their limits. Client-side page modifications can disrupt internal TestCafe processes. Client Functions can not return DOM elements. The rule of thumb is to only inject client-side code when you need to pass otherwise unobtainable page data to the server.

Reviewer: Is this part necessary? This seems too technical for an overview document... Maybe it's best left in the detailed documents linked from the list above. I think we should just remove this paragraph.

Author: I'm sort of split on this. I see where you're coming from, but this is important to get across. The current version of the article (the one on the website) describes these features in even more detail. @kirovboris @VasilyStrelyaev

Reviewer 2: I would leave just the fact that they have limitations and need to be used carefully. We can leave the details for the dedicated topic.

In addition, I think this rule of thumb is a bit restricting. We occasionally have to suggest that people use client functions for page modifications (mainly, after they write to support and the developers dig into their case) or to perform some utility operations (like waiting for a custom event/condition in page scripts).

Author: ```suggestion
> The TestCafe documentation describes the limitations of user-defined client-side scripts.
```

Reviewer: ok
